ENH: Add compressed TSV files to the common principles (#1749)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/common-principles.md

### Tabular files

Tabular data MUST be saved as plain-text, tab-delimited values (`.tsv`) files,
that is, CSV files where commas are replaced by tab characters.
Tabs MUST be true tab characters and MUST NOT be a series of space characters.
Tabular data containing large numbers of rows MAY be saved as
[compressed tabular files (with extension `.tsv.gz`)](#compressed-tabular-files)
as prescribed below.
Each TSV file MUST start with a header line listing the names of all columns
with the exception of [compressed tabular files](#compressed-tabular-files)
where column names are defined in a sidecar metadata

> [JSON object](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) described below.

Author: Watch out - there are small consistency changes that are less apparent because of the use of semantic line breaks - hope that's fine for such a short excerpt.

It is RECOMMENDED that the column names in the header of the TSV file are
written in [`snake_case`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) with the
first letter in lower case (for example, `variable_name`, not `Variable_name`).
Column names defined in the header MUST be separated with tabs as for the data contents.
Furthermore, column names MUST NOT be blank (that is, an empty string) and MUST NOT
be duplicated within a single TSV file.
String values containing tabs MUST be escaped using double quotes.
Missing and non-applicable values MUST be coded as `n/a`.
Numerical values MUST employ the dot (`.`) as decimal separator and MAY be specified
in scientific notation, using `e` or `E` to separate the significand from the
exponent.
TSV files MUST be in UTF-8 encoding.

Example:

```Text
onset	duration	response_time	correct	stop_trial	go_trial

> 200     200         0               n/a     n/a         n/a

Author: the use of actual tabs voided the purpose of the note below.

### Tabular files

Tabular data MUST be saved as plain-text, tab-delimited values (TSV) files
(with [extension `.tsv`](glossary.md#tsv-extensions)),
that is, CSV files where commas are replaced by tab characters.
Tabs MUST be true tab characters and MUST NOT be a series of space characters.
Tabular data containing large numbers of rows MAY be saved as
[compressed tabular files (with extension `.tsv.gz`)](#compressed-tabular-files)
as prescribed below.
Each TSV file MUST start with a header line listing the names of all columns
with two exceptions:

1.  [compressed tabular files](#compressed-tabular-files),
    for which column names are defined in a sidecar metadata
    [JSON object](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) described below; and
1.  [motion recording data](modality-specific-files/motion.md),
    which use plain-text TSV and columns are defined as described

>     in its corresponding of the specifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    in its corresponding section of the specifications.
```

It is RECOMMENDED that the column names in the header of the TSV file are
written in [`snake_case`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) with the
first letter in lower case (for example, `variable_name`, not `Variable_name`).
Column names defined in the header MUST be separated with tabs as for the data contents.
Furthermore, column names MUST NOT be blank (that is, an empty string) and MUST NOT
be duplicated within a single TSV file.
String values containing tabs MUST be escaped using double quotes.
Missing and non-applicable values MUST be coded as `n/a`.
Numerical values MUST employ the dot (`.`) as decimal separator and MAY be specified
in scientific notation, using `e` or `E` to separate the significand from the
exponent.
TSV files MUST be in UTF-8 encoding.

Example:

```Text
onset   duration    response_time   trial_type        trial_extra
200     20.0        127.34e-1       ⌂ (UTF-8 char)    n/a
```

!!! warning "The TSV examples in this document (like the one above this note) are occasionally formatted using space characters instead of tabs to improve human readability."

    Directly copying and then pasting these examples from the specification

>     for use in new BIDS datasets can lead to errors and is discouraged.

Author: I have changed the character to a Chinese word ("Chinese", as per google translator is "中国人" so someone who knows please update if necessary).

I believe we do want pandoc to render Chinese characters. Icons are probably unimportant but non-ascii characters are relevant.

### Tabular files

Tabular data MUST be saved as plain-text, tab-delimited values (TSV) files
(with [extension `.tsv`](glossary.md#tsv-extensions)),
that is, CSV files where commas are replaced by tab characters.
Tabs MUST be true tab characters and MUST NOT be a series of space characters.
Tabular data containing large numbers of rows MAY be saved as
[compressed tabular files (with extension `.tsv.gz`)](#compressed-tabular-files)

> as prescribed below.

Reviewer 2: IMHO ambiguous whether this allows TSVGZ for ALL TSV files (xref: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1749#issuecomment-2021000568)

### Tabular files

Tabular data MUST be saved as plain-text, tab-delimited values (TSV) files

> (with [extension `.tsv`](glossary.md#tsv-extensions)),
> that is, CSV files where commas are replaced by tab characters.

Reviewer 3: this reminded me a (possibly an "incorrect") anecdote about two color blind folks.  To add to the insult -- I do not remember it truly ;)  But here it goes for the same meaning:

One color blind person asks another :
- have you seen my new green car?
- what kind of color is that "green"?
- have you seen the red sunset?
- yes
- so it is like that color but just "green".

We never talk about CSV files in the specification and there is an assumption that users know what those are, and we do not even have a URL.  Let's may be at least add a link if to keep it at all?

```suggestion
(with [extension `.tsv`](glossary.md#tsv-extensions)),
that is, [CSV files](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values) where commas are replaced by tab characters.
```

Tabs MUST be true tab characters and MUST NOT be a series of space characters.
Tabular data such as continuous physiology recordings typically containing
large numbers of rows MAY be saved as
[compressed tabular files (with extension `.tsv.gz`)](#compressed-tabular-files),
which are introduced below.
Plain-text TSV and compressed TSV are not interchangeable, that is, each section

> of the specification prescribes which one SHOULD be used for the data type at

Author: for consistency with the RFC-controlled terms . cc/ @effigies 
```suggestion
of the specification prescribes which one MUST be used for the data type at
```

written in [`snake_case`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snake_case) with the
first letter in lower case (for example, `variable_name`, not `Variable_name`).
Column names defined in the header MUST be separated with tabs as for the data contents.
Furthermore, column names MUST NOT be blank (that is, an empty string) and MUST NOT
be duplicated within a single TSV file.
String values containing tabs MUST be escaped using double quotes.
Missing and non-applicable values MUST be coded as `n/a`.
Numerical values MUST employ the dot (`.`) as decimal separator and MAY be specified
in scientific notation, using `e` or `E` to separate the significand from the
exponent.
TSV files MUST be in UTF-8 encoding.

Example:

```Text
onset   duration    response_time   trial_type        trial_extra
200     20.0        15.8            word              中国人
240     5.0         17.34e-1        visual            n/a
```

!!! warning "Attention"

    The TSV examples in this document (like the one above this note) are occasionally
    formatted using space characters instead of tabs to improve human readability.
    Directly copying and then pasting these examples from the specification

>     for use in new BIDS datasets can lead to errors and is discouraged.

Reviewer 3: such note would be missed for most users who end up at any given TSV example. Can we take advantage of our MACROs to make it so hover over each such decorated TSV brings such a warning?

Author: 👍 (I assume such a macro would have its own separate PR, where the PDF alternative is also covered)

Reviewer 3: not sure if there is any "tooltip" functionality in PDF though. Anyways -- this PR just changes already existing text. So I think we better make a separate issue for this, or better two ;) (I like 2nd one better).

- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/1756
- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/1757

Reviewer 3: but I will resolve this conversation here since not to be addressed in this PR

            "F": {
                "Description": "Female",
                "TermURL": "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/68005260"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Compressed tabular files

Large tabular information such as physiological recordings MAY be stored with
[compressed tab-delineated (TSVGZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions).
Rules for formatting plain-text tabular files apply to TSVGZ files with three exceptions:

> 1.  The contents of TSVGZ files SHOULD be compressed with

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.  The contents of TSVGZ files MUST be compressed with
```

    [gzip](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952).

> 1.  Compressed tabular files SHOULD NOT contain a header in the first row

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.  Compressed tabular files MUST NOT contain a header in the first row
```

    indicating the column names.

> 1.  TSVGZ files SHOULD be accompanied by a JSON file with the same name as their

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1.  TSVGZ files MUST be accompanied by a JSON file with the same name as their
```

    corresponding tabular file but with a `.json` extension.

???+ warning "Columns of TSVGZ files MUST be defined in the corresponding JSON sidecar and the tabular content MUST NOT include a header line."

    In contrast to plain-text TSV files, compressed tabular files files
    MUST NOT include a header line.
    Column names MUST be specified in the JSON file following the
    [`Columns` metadata](glossary.md#columns-metadata) specifications.
    As plain-text tabular data, column names MUST NOT be blank (that is, an empty string),

>     and MUST NOT be duplicated within a single JSON file describing a TSVGZ file.

Reviewer 4: I'm confused. This seems to contradict the previous SHOULD lines. What am I missing?

Author: I believe this was in the physio section meaning that you should not define the same column twice in a JSON object (which is a bit redundant because you can't have the same key twice). Happy to rewrite or remove -- what do you prefer?

Reviewer 4: Ah. I would say it just once unless there is a specific exception or caveat here. Otherwise it's unclear why you're saying it twice with slightly different words.

Apologies, I'm not feeling my best, so if what I say doesn't make sense, feel free to ignore me.

Author: Sad to hear you are not feeling great :( However, this is definitely confusing in the first place and is confusing to me, too. The current docs read:

https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/bd08602760d2fa0fd61e8f579a2677ea9bda8588/src/modality-specific-files/physiological-and-other-continuous-recordings.md#L75-L77

I just moved this here. I'll try to check if this is duplicated from the standard tabular files and remove if so.

Author: Edited to make it clear that this comes from the plain text specs: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1749/commits/3811a8c4262a3ef32d7f37e5675ffdc5f41351c6

Author: Marking resolved -- please suggest again if the direction I took is not satisfactory.

            "F": {
                "Description": "Female",
                "TermURL": "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/68005260"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Compressed tabular files

Large tabular information such as physiological recordings MAY be stored with
[compressed tab-delineated (TSVGZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions).
Rules for formatting plain-text tabular files apply to TSVGZ files with three exceptions:

1.  The contents of TSVGZ files MUST be compressed with
    [gzip](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952).
1.  Compressed tabular files MUST NOT contain a header in the first row
    indicating the column names.
1.  TSVGZ files MUST be accompanied by a JSON file with the same name as their

>     corresponding tabular file but with a `.json` extension.

Author: I would leave it for later, it is not mentioned either for the plain-text tsv files.

> ???+ warning "Columns of TSVGZ files MUST be defined in the corresponding JSON sidecar and the tabular content MUST NOT include a header line."
> 
>     In contrast to plain-text TSV files, compressed tabular files files
>     MUST NOT include a header line.
>     Column names MUST be specified in the JSON file following the
>     [`Columns` metadata](glossary.md#columns-metadata) specifications
>     provided with plain-text tabular data.
>     Similarly, specific column metadata stored with dictionaries such as
>     the `sex` column in the example above MUST be specified following the
>     plain-text tabular metadata prescriptions.
> 
>     TSVGZ are header-less to improve compatibility with existing software
>     (for example, FSL, or PNM), and to facilitate the support for other file formats
>     in the future.

Reviewer 4: Again, too much content in the admonition title. Reading this through again, I would change this to info and write:

```suggestion

!!! note "Column definitions in compressed tabular files"

    In contrast to plain-text TSV files,
    compressed tabular files files MUST NOT include a header line.
    Column names MUST be provided in the JSON file with the
    [`Columns`](glossary.md#columns-metadata) field.
    Each column MAY additionally be described with a column description,
    as described in [Tabular files](#tabular-files).

    TSVGZ are header-less to improve compatibility with existing software
    (for example, FSL, or PNM), and to facilitate the support for other file formats
    in the future.
```

            "F": {
                "Description": "Female",
                "TermURL": "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/68005260"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> ### Compressed tabular files

Reviewer 2: I would make this a sub-heading under tabular files.

```suggestion
#### Compressed tabular files
```

Author: I'm not a fan of this; creating one more level of depth without siblings feels artificial (\*), and it also makes the section less findable. Curious about what others think.

(\*) At least, it would seem logical to do:

```
## Tabular files
### Plain-text tabular files
### Compressed tabular files
```

Large tabular information such as physiological recordings MAY be stored with

> [compressed tab-delineated (TSVGZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions).

Reviewer 2: IMHO ambiguous whether this allows TSVGZ for ALL TSV files (xref: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1749#issuecomment-2021000568)

Author: ```suggestion
Large tabular information, such as physiological recordings, SHOULD be stored with
[compressed tab-delineated (TSVGZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions) when
so established by the specifications.
```

Rules for formatting plain-text tabular files apply to TSVGZ files with three exceptions:

1.  The contents of TSVGZ files MUST be compressed with
    [gzip](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952).
1.  Compressed tabular files MUST NOT contain a header in the first row
    indicating the column names.
1.  TSVGZ files MUST be accompanied by a JSON file with the same name as their
    corresponding tabular file but with a `.json` extension.

> !!! note "Column definitions in compressed tabular files"

Author: @effigies - if the title is not going to be long, I'd simplify even more:
```suggestion
!!! warning "Attention"
```
and for this one, I'd re-up it to warning because this is a common friction point for newcomers.

            "F": {
                "Description": "Female",
                "TermURL": "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/68005260"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Compressed tabular files

Large tabular information, such as physiological recordings, MUST be stored with

> [compressed tab-delineated (TSVGZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions) when

Reviewer 3: I ack that TSVGZ is already in our spec. But it is odd to me to not be TSV.GZ . FWIW it was 517e2ffb2851a342930a0a866c1813aabdeb1dbf which was a part of the huge monumental effort of 
- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1107
but I wonder may be @effigies you remember why you did not go for  `tsv.gz` ?

Author: Not sure what you mean, can you suggest how this would be addressed in your opinion?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[compressed tab-delineated (TSV.GZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions) when
```
and
- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1755

            "F": {
                "Description": "Female",
                "TermURL": "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/68005260"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Compressed tabular files

Large tabular information, such as physiological recordings, MUST be stored with
[compressed tab-delineated (TSVGZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions) when
so established by the specifications.
Rules for formatting plain-text tabular files apply to TSVGZ files with three exceptions:

1.  The contents of TSVGZ files MUST be compressed with
    [gzip](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952).
1.  Compressed tabular files MUST NOT contain a header in the first row
    indicating the column names.

> 1.  TSVGZ files MUST have an associated JSON file that defines the columns in the tabular file.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
1.  TSVGZ files MUST have an associated JSON file that defines the columns in the tabular file.
```

            "F": {
                "Description": "Female",
                "TermURL": "https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/68005260"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

### Compressed tabular files

> Large tabular information, such as physiological recordings, SHOULD be stored with

Reviewer 4: As phrased here, this would be a kind of meta-requirement on spec authors to use TSVGZ if they're large, not a requirement on curators/converters, who will receive direction from the individual data type specifications. The problem here is that motion has violated this, using yet another TSV + `channels.tsv` configuration.

> Large tabular information, such as physiological recordings, SHOULD be stored with

Author: You mean, it would be better to roll back to SHOULD? Happy to change as needed if the problem is not the particular term.

> Large tabular information, such as physiological recordings, SHOULD be stored with

Reviewer 4: Actually, reading more context, it's ` MUST be stored [...] when so established by the specifications.`

That's fine then.

[compressed tab-delineated (TSVGZ) files](glossary.md#tsvgz-extensions) when
so established by the specifications.
Rules for formatting plain-text tabular files apply to TSVGZ files with three exceptions:

1.  The contents of TSVGZ files MUST be compressed with
    [gzip](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1952).
1.  Compressed tabular files MUST NOT contain a header in the first row
    indicating the column names.

> 1.  TSVGZ files MUST be accompanied by a JSON file with the same name as their
>     corresponding tabular file but with a `.json` extension.

Author: From https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1750#discussion_r1543499316
```suggestion
1.  TSVGZ files MUST have an associated JSON file that defines the columns in the tabular file.
```
